CASSANDRA-17750: Add docs for dependency management changes (#170)
apache/cassandra-website: site-content/source/modules/ROOT/pages/development/dependencies.adoc

== Dependency Management

New dependencies should not be included without community consensus first being
obtained via a `[DISCUSS]` thread on the dev@cassandra.apache.org mailing list.

> As Cassandra is an Apache product, all included libraries must follow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As Cassandra is an ASF project, all included libraries must follow
```

Apache's https://www.apache.org/legal/resolved.html[software license
requirements].

Cassandra uses the Ant build system and Maven POMs for dependency specification.

> In Cassandra 4.2 the format of POMs was moved from within the `build.xml` file to separate POM template files that are processed by Ant.

Reviewer: There no Cassandra 4.2 version.  Can we change all occurrences of 4.2 to 5.0 please.

In both pre-4.2 and post-4.2 Cassandra, there are several POMs that dependencies can be included in:

* *parent-pom*
    - Contains all dependencies with the respective version. All other poms
      will refer to the artifacts with specified versions listed here.
    - Since Cassandra 4.2, the `parent-pom` template is `.build/parent-pom-template.xml`.
* *build-deps-pom(-sources)* + *coverage-deps-pom*
    - used by the `ant build` target. Listed dependencies will be resolved and
      copied to `build/lib/{jar,sources}` by executing the
      `maven-ant-tasks-retrieve-build` target. This should contain libraries that are
      required for build tools (grammar, docs, instrumentation), but are not
      shipped as part of the Cassandra distribution.

>     - Since Cassandra 4.0, `coverage-deps-pom` has been removed and the

Reviewer: add an item about  `lib/` and  `resolver-dist-lib` ?

Author: Can you share more about what you mean? I'll admit I haven't used resolver-dist-lib directly so I'm not the right person to document its behavior for new contributors.

Reviewer: When you `ant artifacts` this will depend on the `resolver-dist-lib` target.  This propagates the `lib/` folder.  This folder contains the jar files that are actually distributed in a release (e.g. the tarball, the deb and rpm packages).  As opposed to `build/lib/jars` which contains more, e.g. build libs, provided scope, optional deps, etc.

We have to keep a closer eye on what gets generated into the `lib/` folder, according to ASF distribution policy: https://www.apache.org/legal/resolved.html

Author: I've added more details here

      `build-deps-pom` template is `.build/cassandra-build-deps-template.xml`.
* *all-pom*
    - POM for https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/org.apache.cassandra/cassandra-all[cassandra-all.jar]

>       that can be installed or deployed to public maven repos via `ant publish`.

Reviewer: no you can't.  nothing can be pushed public without a vote and three PMC +1s

(what `ant publish` does it stage it the ASF nexus, where we can then vote on it.  but no one AFAIK needs to do this because we only do it as part of our release process.)

when a vote is finalised the staging repo in ASF nexus is "published" and gets pushed out to other public repos.

Author: This was an existing part of the documentation, but I just made some clarifications - let me know if this is suitable for you

      execution.
    - Since Cassandra 3.0, `test-deps-pom` has been removed.

The `ant write-poms` target produces valid POM files in the `build/` directory.

=== Dependency management before Cassandra 4.2

To update dependencies, update the parent and child POM definitions in
`build.xml`. The parent POM should include the `dependency` tag with `groupId`,
`artifactId`, `version`, and optional `scope` fields. The child POM(s) should
include the `dependency` tag with `groupId` and `artifactId`. See the
https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html#Dependency_Management[Maven docs]
for a complete reference on how to reference dependencies across parent and
child POMs.

Here is
https://github.com/apache/cassandra/commit/4b3f07fc74089151efeff7a8fdfa9c414a1f0d6a#diff-766797f233c18114f9499750cf1ffbf3829aeea50283850619c01bd173132021[an example]
of a commit that changes dependency versions pre-4.2.

=== Dependency management in Cassandra 4.2 and later

In Cassandra 4.2 and later, dependencies are managed in Maven POM templates in
`.build/\*-template.xml`. These templates are processed into valid Maven POMs

> and copied to `build/\*.pom` by the `ant write-poms` task.

Reviewer: see build instructions in README, and output of GHA.

Apache's https://www.apache.org/legal/resolved.html[software license
requirements].

=== Dependency management in Cassandra 4.2 and onwards

In Cassandra 4.2 and onwards, dependencies are managed in Maven POM templates
in `.build/*-template.xml`. These templates are processed into valid Maven POMs
with the `ant write-poms` task and copied to `build/*.pom`.

The following POMs from `build.xml` have been migrated to templates:
* `parent-pom` is now at `.build/parent-pom-template.xml`
* `all-pom` is now at `.build/cassandra-deps-template.xml`
* `build-deps-pom` is now at `.build/cassandra-build-deps-template.xml`

To add new dependencies in Cassandra 4.2 onwards, add the dependency to
`parent-pom-template` and `cassandra-deps-template`, and optionally
`cassandra-build-deps-template` if the dependency is required for build only.
See
https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html#Dependency_Management[the
Maven docs] on how to reference dependencies in the parent POM from the child

> POMs.

Reviewer: lines 5-9 need fixing. this sentence would be work after that.

> In Cassandra 4.2 and onwards, dependencies are managed in Maven POM templates
> in `.build/*-template.xml`. These templates are processed into valid Maven POMs
> with the `ant write-poms` task and copied to `build/*.pom`.
> 
> The following POMs from `build.xml` have been migrated to templates:
> * `parent-pom` is now at `.build/parent-pom-template.xml`
> * `all-pom` is now at `.build/cassandra-deps-template.xml`
> * `build-deps-pom` is now at `.build/cassandra-build-deps-template.xml`
> 
> To add new dependencies in Cassandra 4.2 onwards, add the dependency to
> `parent-pom-template` and `cassandra-deps-template`, and optionally
> `cassandra-build-deps-template` if the dependency is required for build only.
> See
> https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html#Dependency_Management[the
> Maven docs] on how to reference dependencies in the parent POM from the child
> POMs.
> 
> For dependency versions that need to be available in `build.xml` and
> `parent-pom-template`, specify the version as a property in `build.xml`, add it
> to the `ant write-poms` target, then add the property to `parent-pom-template`
> with the value of the template substitution.
> 
> For more information on this change, see
> https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CASSANDRA-17750[CASSANDRA-17750].

Reviewer: ```suggestion

* Update dependency in `.build/parent-pom-template.xml` with version
** Update `.build/cassandra-deps-template.xml` for runtime and test dependencies
** Update `.build/cassandra-build-deps-template.xml` for build dependencies

```

Author: I think it's important to spell this out in a little more detail, at least while the change is new. I'd support reducing it in the future, when people are more familiar with the process. But right now the change is so fresh that a newcomer might not get a good answer even after asking in Slack, and adding a little more detail here could make their lives a little easier.

Reviewer 2: I agree with Abe here. Even people long time on the project who don't deal with those things regularly will benefit

Apache's https://www.apache.org/legal/resolved.html[software license
requirements].

> === Changes to dependency management in Cassandra 4.1

Reviewer 3: you mean 4.2 right?  only applied to trunk

> Before Cassandra 4.1, dependencies were managed in `build.xml` and managed with

Reviewer 3: don't need `,`

Maven Ant Tasks. In Cassandra 4.1 and onwards, dependencies are managed in POM

> templates in `.build/`. New dependencies should be added to the parent POM

Reviewer 3: please flesh this out more, such as what are the files to modify. "read the JIRA" isn't good for our docs...

into valid Maven POMs with the `ant write-poms` task and copied to
`build/*.pom`.

The following POMs from `build.xml` have been migrated to templates:
* `parent-pom` is now at `.build/parent-pom-template.xml`
* `all-pom` is now at `.build/cassandra-deps-template.xml`
* `build-deps-pom` is now at `.build/cassandra-build-deps-template.xml`

To add new dependencies in Cassandra 4.2 onwards, add the dependency to
`parent-pom-template` and `cassandra-deps-template`, and optionally
`cassandra-build-deps-template` if the dependency is required for build only.
See
https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html#Dependency_Management[the
Maven docs] on how to reference dependencies in the parent POM from the child
POMs.

For dependency versions that need to be available in `build.xml` and
`parent-pom-template`, specify the version as a property in `build.xml`, add it
to the `ant write-poms` target, then add the property to `parent-pom-template`
with the value of the template substitution.

For more information on this change, see
https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CASSANDRA-17750[CASSANDRA-17750].

> 

Reviewer: i'm going to nit-pick a bit here… forgive me…

but i'm curious whether folk think this page would be more readable if it contains two separate unadulterated sections:
- Dependency Management 4.2+
- Dependency Management before 4.2

For example, the `Changes to dependency management in Cassandra 4.2` section puts unnecessary cognitive load onto the reader if they just don't care about how it worked before 4.2 
The reader just wants to know what to do.

Author: I'm up for that - how's my last edit? This separates those two sections a bit more clearly. We can always edit based on feedback from more users as well.

Reviewer 2: I like the latest changes, I would probably just put before 4.2 first and then 4.2. POM file types shouldn't be only at the end I think or we need some kind of anchor to them maybe, where we refer to changes to be done to them or what changed in different versions.
Otherwise LGTM, this is more around how to organize to make the flow easier to follow. 
Thanks for looking into that!

Author: In my opinion, the main audience for this doc (in the short term) is developers who are familiar with how to add dependencies in the pre-4.2 world, and are trying to figure out how to do things post-17750. In that scenario, I think it makes sense to increase visibility around the changes by having that section come first. Over time, this will change as 4.2 becomes more familiar to more folks.

Reviewer: > In my opinion, the main audience for this doc (in the short term) is developers who are familiar with how to add dependencies in the pre-4.2 world, and are trying to figure out how to do things post-17750.

I would disagree with this statement :) because that method only existed for a year, ref [CASSANDRA-16391](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CASSANDRA-16391). There was a much longer precedence before (checking jar and license files into `lib/`). I do suspect most developers are next to starting from scratch (and we don't add deps that often).

If you want the extra explanation there, I don't object if it appears later. But I'm in the "don't explain, don't complain" camp, where a _tl;dr what do i do_  comes first so I can be quick.  (My example was overly concise, and only meant as an example.)

Reviewer 2: I am with Mick here. Also, I don't like the tribe knowledge which I am honestly even sure that it is not the case here. Not many people deal with the dependencies or do it regularly. Also, yes, good point, things changed last year. I prefer to be more noisy and things to be more documented than less.

`build/*.pom`.

The following POMs from `build.xml` have been migrated to templates:
* `parent-pom` is now at `.build/parent-pom-template.xml`
* `all-pom` is now at `.build/cassandra-deps-template.xml`
* `build-deps-pom` is now at `.build/cassandra-build-deps-template.xml`

To add new dependencies in Cassandra 4.2 onwards, add the dependency to
`parent-pom-template` and `cassandra-deps-template`, and optionally
`cassandra-build-deps-template` if the dependency is required for build only.
See
https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html#Dependency_Management[the
Maven docs] on how to reference dependencies in the parent POM from the child
POMs.

For dependency versions that need to be available in `build.xml` and
`parent-pom-template`, specify the version as a property in `build.xml`, add it
to the `ant write-poms` target, then add the property to `parent-pom-template`
with the value of the template substitution.

For more information on this change, see
https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CASSANDRA-17750[CASSANDRA-17750].

=== Required steps to add or update libraries

* Add or replace jar file in `lib` directory

> * Add or update `lib/license` files

Reviewer: both points above are no longer true.

The `ant write-poms` target produces valid POM files in the `build/` directory.

Dependencies added to the `lib/` directory are built into the release artifacts
by the `ant artifacts` target (see target `resolver-dist-lib`). Libraries
distributed this way must meet the

> [https://www.apache.org/legal/resolved.html]ASF distribution policy.

Reviewer: link is not working,

Author: Oopsies - fixed
